Hello and welcome back to the course.
Today, we're talking about p values and statistical significance.
Quick heads up.
This tutorial is borrowed from another course of Århus called Statistics for Business Analytics and
Data Science.
A to Z, if you hear references to a Z score and hypothesis testing and other parts that are relevant
to that course, but not relevant to the course in which we're in right now.
Then please ignore them.
The focus of this tutorial, what you want to get out of it is P values.
What they mean, how to feel about them and what statistical significance, significance and means and
what hypothesis testing is all about.
So with that in mind, here we go.
Hello and welcome back to the course on statistics.
Today, we've got a very exciting topic, statistical significance.
And it's very exciting because I know that from my experience from my career, it's a question that
is always asked, or at least you ask yourself this question, is my results statistically significant
or not?
Or are these insights statistically significant or not?
And if you don't understand statistical significance, then it's a question that you dread from your
manager or the person that you're reporting to because you cannot substantiate your results.
You found some stuff, but you don't know if it's right or wrong.
And in this section, we're going to be exploring this concept in a lot of detail and we're going to
be referencing it a lot.
And you will get a great understanding.
Hopefully you'll be able to build a strong understanding of statistical significance.
However, in this tutorial, what we're going to focus on is an on the intuition, behind statistical
significance of what how you can link how you feel about an experiment to what actually statistical
significance is.
So let's have a look.
All right.
So here we've gone.
Experiment a coin toss.
I know it's always a coin toss, but a coin toss is, in all fairness, a great example to get started
with because it is so simple.
There's only two possible outcomes.
And you're already done this so many times in your life that you know kind of what to expect.
And that's why it will help us build intuition.
So there are two possible versions or two possible situations.
Kind of like we're going to start talking about hypothesis testing right now.
We're talking about hypothesis testing with thinking about two possible alternative universes, if you
will, if you want to put it that way.
So one possible universe is that in that universe, it's a fair coin in that scenario, in that environment.
But probably I like the way to put it as in the universe.
So in that universe, there is a fair coin.
So that's that's our original assumption as as go to H zero, that's the null hypothesis that we're
starting off with.
And then H one is the alternative universe or the alternative hypothesis, sometimes also called H a.
And in this universe, this is not a fair coin.
So we want to understand which universe do we live in or which situation are we actually dealing before?
What is the truth?
That's what we're trying to assess.
Is it a fair coin?
Is the null hypothesis correct or is it not a fair coin?
And then the alternative hypothesis is correct.
And so the way we're gonna go about this is we're going to assume that H zero or the null hypothesis
is true.
So, again, to assume they will live in the first universe and then based on our experiment, we're
going to see if we can contradict that, if we're going to come to a contradiction and say, oh, actually,
our assumption was incorrect.
And we'll talk more about that towards the end of the sartorial.
But for now, let's assume that you've got a coin that you're tossing that some or somebody is going
to toss just now and you're assuming it's a fair coin.
We live in that universe.
So the coin is toss the first time and the result is tails.
The question is, how do you feel about this figure?
Forget about of statistics for a second.
How do you feel about this?
Do you feel that this is a fair coin or coin is rigged?
You probably feel that it is likely a fair coin.
This is a totally probable outcome in that universe that we have assumed we live in.
In the age zero universe.
The probability of that is 50 percent.
So it could have been has could have been tails.
No problem.
Then the coin is tossed a second time and tails again.
How do you feel about this now?
Do you feel that the coin is rigged or do you feel that is a fair coin?
Well, let's look at the probability of this happening in our universe that we're living in in the age
zero hypotheses.
The probability of that happening, if this is a fair coin is 25 percent.
So no big deal could happen.
Then the coin is tossed again and again.
It's tails.
OK, so what?
How do you feel about that now?
What do you feel about having three coins, three times the same coin as tossed and you get every single
it's tails.
Well, you know, it might be a bit a bit suspicious, but it's fairly OK.
Because in our universe in which we live in.
In the Ajmera universe, where the coin is assumed, to be fair, this could have happened.
And the possibility of that happening is.
Twelve percent.
But then that coin is tossed again.
And guess what?
It's tails again.
All right.
So are you getting a bit suspicious now?
Do you feel that if this were a fair coin, this would be quite hard for this to happen?
Well, in the universe and we assume we live in in the age zero universe where the null hypothesis is
is assumed to be true or when the null hypothesis is true and we assume we're in that universe.
Well, in that case, this could have happened with probability of six percent.
All right.
And then the coin is tossed again and again.
It is tails.
Now, how do you feel about it?
How do you feel about seeing somebody toss a coin and then getting tails every single time, five times
in a row?
Well, you feel a bit.
Correct me if I'm wrong, but I'm assuming you feel a bit uneasy about that.
Did you feel that something might be going on here?
Something is a bit not right or it's a bit suspicious that this coin is has had tails five times in
a row.
And your feeling is correct.
You're feeling is natural because the probability of this happening, if we assume that it is a fair
coin, the probability of this happening is only three percent.
So if we assume that we live in a universe where the null hypothesis is true, where the coin is a fair
coin, we would have only seen this with a likelihood of three percent, meaning that you would have
to watch this experiment on 33 different occasions.
Like you watch it today, you watch it tomorrow, you watch it another day.
You'll have to watch it on 33 different days or 33 different times.
This experiment of five Quinton's would have to be conducted only once you would see this result.
So it's a very low probability.
And that's why you're feeling of this is some something's going on here is completely valid, completely
justified.
But then let's see what happens.
A coin is tossed again and this time it's guess what?
Tails again.
I know you're probably expecting heads now.
It's tails again.
What do you think is going on here?
How do you feel about this coin?
Do you feel that it's a it's still a fair coin?
Do you feel that our assumption that it's a fair coin is correct or do you feel uneasy about that assumption?
Do you feel that something might be suspicious here?
And if you feel there's something very suspicious here, you are again, very well, just for even more
than so than previously, because possibility of that happening is about one percent, one percent only.
And then what is going on here is that the probability of this happening is dropping as you get more
and more tails.
And in terms of this course, in further down, we'll be operating with the term P value.
In fact, we've already seen P values.
When we looked at the Z score table previously, when we were looking up the Z scores.
Well, in that table, in the middle, what you have is actually a P value.
So you can see that the P value is dropping out simply the probability of this happening, given that
we're in a universe where the null hypothesis is true and this is very important to understand that
if we in this universe, this top universe, then this is what the P value looks like.
It's very unlikely that you'll get six tails in a row.
However, if you think about it for a second, if we were in this universe where it's not a fair coin,
where it's for example, it's a weighted coin or both sides of the coin are tails that if you have a
coin like that, if we were in this universe, then these P values re completely different.
They wouldn't be like this.
The P values would be 100 percent, 100 percent, hundred percent, hundreds and hundreds and hundreds.
And so in if we lived in the second universe, we wouldn't get that feeling.
We wouldn't get suspicious over here or even more suspicious or here.
We would totally be comfortable of this because we know that the coin has two tails on each side.
There's a tails on the coin.
And therefore, we would be totally comfortable with one one tails and our own two tails and or three,
four or five, six tells in a row.
We wouldn't get any uneasy feeling about it if we lived in this universe.
However, the way hypothesis testing works is that we assume we live in this universe over here at the
top, the null hypothesis universe.
And then we want to see will we get whatever our experiment is?
Will we get uneasy and uneasy feeling about and this uneasy feeling in mathematical terms?
You can't just go up to your boss and say or your manager or your client, you guys just go and say,
I had an uneasy feeling about this.
I don't think it's true.
Of course, they have to put in mathematical terms, and that's where statistical significance comes
in.
So statistical significance is basically this line over here, as simple as that five percent.
So that's where you start getting this uneasy feeling, just as just after the six percent, you started
being very suspicious about things going on.
And that's about right.
That's because as soon as something is, five percent are less likely to happen.
That's the alpha here.
Then that is like five percent is like one out of 20.
So that's when we.
The line and we say, OK.
So that is it's so unlikely, I am so unlikely to see this by random that I'm going to reject this null
hypothesis.
I'm going to say that because I'm seeing this.
And it was so unlikely to happen at random.
This cannot be true.
And that's where you say that I am confident.
I'm rejecting this whole null hypothesis of 95 percent confidence that I'm 95 percent sure that we don't
live in this universe.
There's there's a five percent chance that we do.
But I am 95 percent sure that we don't live in this universe.
I'm going to reject that hypothesis and I'm going to state that we live in a universe where this coin
is actually rigged.
And you can set this confidence level to whatever you like and you can set it to 10 percent and you'd
be rejecting over here.
You can set it to one percent.
You could be rejecting or here.
So it depends on your experiment.
Most of the time.
Ninety five is a good level to go with.
But sometimes especially in medical trials and things like that, where it's a people's lives depend
on that, the results or the confirmation or not confirmation or like where there is whether or not
we reject the null hypothesis.
In most cases, you might want to sometimes require that you said it to 99 percent.
So depends on your experiment and on your on what you're doing with those results.
But generally speaking, this is what's Disko significance all about.
It's the point where in human intuitive terms, you get uneasy about the null hypothesis being true
and you get super suspicious about it in mathematical terms is just where you draw the line and you
say, okay, I have enough confidence or like this is sufficient level of confidence for me to reject
the null hypothesis.
So I actually am going to state that we live in this alternate universe.